archlinux_installguide.md, before:

# Archlinux Installation Guide - Thiplouv's Edition
> This guide is a reminder for a specific Arch Linux installation. You can use it as you wishes, but remember that it contains a lot of specific stuff that might differ from your tastes.

___
## **Pre-installation**
> This part ensure that the iso is ready for a optimised installation.
* Archlinux iso can be downloaded via [this French repo](http://archlinux.mirrors.ovh.net/archlinux/iso/latest/).

* Changing to **AZERTY** keyboard layout can be achieved this way: 
  >```loadkeys fr-latin1```

* To see if the system boot mode (uefi or legacy boot), check if there is any efi partitions mounted this way: 
  >```ls /sys/firmware/efi/efivars```

* Verify is the iso is connected to internet:
  * List the network interfaces:
    > ```ip link```
  * Check if the connection is working:
    > ```ping www.archlinux.org```

* Update the system clock:
  * Enable the Network Time Protocol
    > ```timedatectl set-ntp true```
  * Check the service status
    > ```timedatectl status```
___
## **Disks partitionning**
> This part covers the disk partitionning process. This guide shows only the uefi partitioning scheme, as it is the boot mode I use. However, you can choose to use different schemes, as described in the [Archlinux wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Installation_guide#Partition_the_disks).

To identify all the disks (and the partitions) that are currently mounted, run:
> ```fdisk -l```


### **Creation**
Next, we can launch the partitionning utility using:
> ```cfdisk```

As we are using the uefi boot mode fore this installation, we choose **GPT** as the partition table.

The partition sheme that we will choose is the following one:

| Mount point  | Partition   | Partition type        | Size                    |
|:-------------|:------------|:----------------------|:------------------------|
| _/mnt/efi_   | _/dev/sda1_ | EFI System Partition  | 512M                    |
| [SWAP]       | _/dev/sda2_ | Linux Swap            | 8G                      |
| _/mnt_       | _/dev/sda3_ | Linux x86-64 root (/) | Remainder of the device |

<span style="color: #FF0000">Warning</span>: here, sub-partitions are noted _sda_, but it can be anything else depending of the type of storage you use (example: /_dev/nvme0_ for NVME ssds).

### **Formatting**
Now that we have all the partitions we need, we can format them:

* We begin with the EFI partition:
    > ```mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/sda1```

* Next, we can initialize the swap partition:
    > ```mkswap /dev/sda2```

* Finally, we can format the root partition in EXT4:
    > ```mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda3```

### **Mounting**
Now that the partitions are created and formatted, we can initialize them.

* First, let's mount the root volume to /mnt:
    > ```mount /dev/sda3 /mnt```

* Next, let's prepare the efi partition:
    > ```mkdir /mnt/efi```
    
    > ```mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/efi```

* Finally, we can enable the swap partition:
    > ```swapon /dev/sda2```

Now, all the partitions are ready and we can begin the installation process.
___

## **Installation**
> Now starts the real Archlinux installation process, with basic system configuration.

### **Essential packages installation**

To ensure a fast and stable connection, let's configure Pacman's mirror servers:

    nano /etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist

**Note:** Using _Alt+R_ keys, we can replace _Server_ and replace all of them by _#Server_.

Now we can add our prefered repository. Mine is:

    Server = http://archlinux.mirrors.ovh.net/archlinux/$repo/os/x86_64

Now that the mirror servers are configured, it's time to install essentials program, such as:
* Linux kernel and headers,
* Bootloaders,
* Networking programs
* Text editors,
* Manual pages,
* Other stuff that you want to have installed when your system will restart.

Here is what I install:

    pacstrap /mnt base base-devel linux linux-firmware grub efibootmgr os-prober dhcpcd neovim nano man-db man-pages texinfo sudo

**Note:** don't forger to add _iwd_ if you need to use WIFI.


### **Basic system configuration**

Let's start by generating FSTAB file:

    genfstab -U /mnt >> /mnt/etc/fstab

Now, we can change root into the new system:

    arch-chroot /mnt

At this point, we can start to configure the new installed system.
Let's start with time zone and locales.

    ln -sf /usr/share/zoneinfo/Europe/Paris /etc/localtime
    hwclock --systohc

**Note:** The above line needs a Windows registery modification if a dualboot is installed. See [this guide](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/System_time#UTC_in_Microsoft_Windows).

Let's now edit the localization :

    nvim /etc/locale.gen

As I want my system to be in English but with European features, such as metric measurements,etc... I will use the Ireland English Locale. Do as you wishes.

    # Uncoment these lines:
    en_IE.UTF-8
    en_US.UTF-8

We can now generates the locales by running:

    locale-gen

Let's now change the language:

    nvim /etc/locale.conf
    ---------------------
    LANG=en_IE.UTF-8
    LC_COLLATE=C

And we can make the console keyboard layout persistent:

    nvim /etc/vconsole.conf
    -----------------------
    KEYMAP=fr-latin1

Let's also add the hostname of the computer:

    nvim /etc/hostname
    ------------------
    <myhostname>

Before going to the bootloader installation, let's change the root password by running:

    passwd


### **Bootloader Installation**
> In this part we are going to install the GRUB bootloader, with UEFI boot mode.

**Note:** Remember that the EFI partition is already mounted to the system at /efi.

To install GRUB on your system, run this command:

    grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/efi --bootloader-id=GRUB

Before generating the main configuration file, I like to enable os-prober for searching for other os if a dualboot is configured:

    nvim /etc/default/grub
    ----------------------
    # Uncomment to enable os-prober
    GRUB_DISABLE_OS_PROBER=false

Once it is done, we can generate the GRUB main configuration file by running:

    grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg

Now that grub is installed, we can exit from the chrooted system and restart the computer to see if the installation was successful. 

Just run:

    exit
    reboot

## **Post-installation**
> In this part, we are going to cover some post-installation stuff that I like to do once my system restarted.

### **Internet connection**
After logging in as root, let's start the dhcp service to and verify the internet connection:

For a wired connection with dynamic ip address :

    systemctl start dhcpcd
    ping www.archlinux.org

For a wireless connection, run:

    systemctl start iwd
    systemctl enable rfkill-unblock@all
    ping www.archlinux.org

If the connection works, don't forget to enable these systemd services by replacing the _start_ command to _enable_.

### **Video driver**
Before any further ado, let's install the video driver required by our hardware.

For a **Virtual Machine** (such as vmware), just run:

    pacman -S open-vm-tools
    systemctl enable vmtoolsd.service
    systemctl enable vmware-vmblock-fuse.service

For a **Nvidia** graphic card, just run:

    pacman -S nvidia nvidia-settings
    reboot

After the system has rebooted, just run:

    nvidia-xconfig

    # Verify your xorg configuration file:
    nvim /etc/X11/xorg.conf

**Note:** The documentation for the Nvidia Drivers installation can be found [here](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/NVIDIA).

### **User Management**
Now that the system is working and is connected to internet, it is time to add our user to the system.

To do so, just run:

    useradd -m -G wheel -s /bin/bash thib
    passwd thib

As we added the new created user to the wheel group, let's give this group the permitions to use sudo commands:

    EDITOR=nvim visudo
    ------------------------------------------------------------------
    # Uncomment to allow members of group wheel to execute any command
    %wheel ALL=(ALL) ALL

Now that our new user is created and can run sudo commands, we can logout from the root user and login with our new user. Just run:

    exit


### **Window manager**
 Now, it is time to install a window manager.

Before that, we need to install the X Window System (Xorg). To do so, just run:

    sudo pacman -S xorg xorg-xinit

Once the operation is successful, we can install the window manager of our choice. I will go for bspwm.

    sudo pacman -S bspwm sxhkd

These are the core packages for the i3 windoww manager, but I also usually install:

* A compositor
* A program launcher
* A terminal
* A wallpaper manager
* Git
* The user directories
* An AUR client
* etc...

This can be done by running:

    sudo pacman -S polybar picom dmenu alacritty feh git xdg-user-dirs
    xdg-user-dirs-update

I usually use yay as my AUR client:

    cd Downloads/
    git clone https://aur.archlinux.org/yay.git
    cd yay
    makepkg -si

Now that all of this stuff is done, we can configure Xinit to start our window manager. To do so, let's start by copying the default xinit configuration file:

    cp /etc/X11/xinit/xinitrc ~/.xinitrc

We also need to copy the default bspwm and sxhkd config files to our home directory by doing like so :
    
    mkdir ~/.config/bspwm
    mkdir ~/.config/sxhkd
    cp /usr/share/doc/bspwm/examples/bspwmrc ~/.config/bspwm/bspwmrc
    cp /usr/share/doc/bspwm/examples/sxhkdrc ~/.config/sxhkd/sxhkdrc

Now, let's replace the default configuration by ours:

    # Replace these lines:
    twm &
    xclock -geometry 50x50-1+1 &
    xterm -geometry 80x50+494+51 &
    xterm -geometry 80x20+494-0 &
    exec xterm -geometry 80x66+0+0 -name login

    # By those lines:
    setxkbmap -layout fr
    picom &
    exec bspwm

Now, you should be able to start the newly installed window manager by running:

    startx

And that's the end ! Now, you can continue to configure your system as you wishes.

Commit message:

Adds section for disabling pc speaker

archlinux_installguide.md, after:

# Archlinux Installation Guide - Thiplouv's Edition
> This guide is a reminder for a specific Arch Linux installation. You can use it as you wishes, but remember that it contains a lot of specific stuff that might differ from your tastes.

___
## **Pre-installation**
> This part ensure that the iso is ready for a optimised installation.
* Archlinux iso can be downloaded via [this French repo](http://archlinux.mirrors.ovh.net/archlinux/iso/latest/).

* Changing to **AZERTY** keyboard layout can be achieved this way: 
  >```loadkeys fr-latin1```

* To see if the system boot mode (uefi or legacy boot), check if there is any efi partitions mounted this way: 
  >```ls /sys/firmware/efi/efivars```

* Verify is the iso is connected to internet:
  * List the network interfaces:
    > ```ip link```
  * Check if the connection is working:
    > ```ping www.archlinux.org```

* Update the system clock:
  * Enable the Network Time Protocol
    > ```timedatectl set-ntp true```
  * Check the service status
    > ```timedatectl status```
___
## **Disks partitionning**
> This part covers the disk partitionning process. This guide shows only the uefi partitioning scheme, as it is the boot mode I use. However, you can choose to use different schemes, as described in the [Archlinux wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Installation_guide#Partition_the_disks).

To identify all the disks (and the partitions) that are currently mounted, run:
> ```fdisk -l```


### **Creation**
Next, we can launch the partitionning utility using:
> ```cfdisk```

As we are using the uefi boot mode fore this installation, we choose **GPT** as the partition table.

The partition sheme that we will choose is the following one:

| Mount point  | Partition   | Partition type        | Size                    |
|:-------------|:------------|:----------------------|:------------------------|
| _/mnt/efi_   | _/dev/sda1_ | EFI System Partition  | 512M                    |
| [SWAP]       | _/dev/sda2_ | Linux Swap            | 8G                      |
| _/mnt_       | _/dev/sda3_ | Linux x86-64 root (/) | Remainder of the device |

<span style="color: #FF0000">Warning</span>: here, sub-partitions are noted _sda_, but it can be anything else depending of the type of storage you use (example: /_dev/nvme0_ for NVME ssds).

### **Formatting**
Now that we have all the partitions we need, we can format them:

* We begin with the EFI partition:
    > ```mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/sda1```

* Next, we can initialize the swap partition:
    > ```mkswap /dev/sda2```

* Finally, we can format the root partition in EXT4:
    > ```mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda3```

### **Mounting**
Now that the partitions are created and formatted, we can initialize them.

* First, let's mount the root volume to /mnt:
    > ```mount /dev/sda3 /mnt```

* Next, let's prepare the efi partition:
    > ```mkdir /mnt/efi```
    
    > ```mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/efi```

* Finally, we can enable the swap partition:
    > ```swapon /dev/sda2```

Now, all the partitions are ready and we can begin the installation process.
___

## **Installation**
> Now starts the real Archlinux installation process, with basic system configuration.

### **Essential packages installation**

To ensure a fast and stable connection, let's configure Pacman's mirror servers:

    nano /etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist

**Note:** Using _Alt+R_ keys, we can replace _Server_ and replace all of them by _#Server_.

Now we can add our prefered repository. Mine is:

    Server = http://archlinux.mirrors.ovh.net/archlinux/$repo/os/x86_64

Now that the mirror servers are configured, it's time to install essentials program, such as:
* Linux kernel and headers,
* Bootloaders,
* Networking programs
* Text editors,
* Manual pages,
* Other stuff that you want to have installed when your system will restart.

Here is what I install:

    pacstrap /mnt base base-devel linux linux-firmware grub efibootmgr os-prober dhcpcd neovim nano man-db man-pages texinfo sudo

**Note:** don't forger to add _iwd_ if you need to use WIFI.


### **Basic system configuration**

Let's start by generating FSTAB file:

    genfstab -U /mnt >> /mnt/etc/fstab

Now, we can change root into the new system:

    arch-chroot /mnt

At this point, we can start to configure the new installed system.
Let's start with time zone and locales.

    ln -sf /usr/share/zoneinfo/Europe/Paris /etc/localtime
    hwclock --systohc

**Note:** The above line needs a Windows registery modification if a dualboot is installed. See [this guide](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/System_time#UTC_in_Microsoft_Windows).

Let's now edit the localization :

    nvim /etc/locale.gen

As I want my system to be in English but with European features, such as metric measurements,etc... I will use the Ireland English Locale. Do as you wishes.

    # Uncoment these lines:
    en_IE.UTF-8
    en_US.UTF-8

We can now generates the locales by running:

    locale-gen

Let's now change the language:

    nvim /etc/locale.conf
    ---------------------
    LANG=en_IE.UTF-8
    LC_COLLATE=C

And we can make the console keyboard layout persistent:

    nvim /etc/vconsole.conf
    -----------------------
    KEYMAP=fr-latin1

Let's also add the hostname of the computer:

    nvim /etc/hostname
    ------------------
    <myhostname>

Before going to the bootloader installation, let's change the root password by running:

    passwd


### **Bootloader Installation**
> In this part we are going to install the GRUB bootloader, with UEFI boot mode.

**Note:** Remember that the EFI partition is already mounted to the system at /efi.

To install GRUB on your system, run this command:

    grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/efi --bootloader-id=GRUB

Before generating the main configuration file, I like to enable os-prober for searching for other os if a dualboot is configured:

    nvim /etc/default/grub
    ----------------------
    # Uncomment to enable os-prober
    GRUB_DISABLE_OS_PROBER=false

Once it is done, we can generate the GRUB main configuration file by running:

    grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg

Now that grub is installed, we can exit from the chrooted system and restart the computer to see if the installation was successful. 

Just run:

    exit
    reboot

## **Post-installation**
> In this part, we are going to cover some post-installation stuff that I like to do once my system restarted.

### **Removing the PC Speaker BEEP**
This is one of the most important part of the configuration imo!
We will blacklist the pc speaker kernel module to remove the (very) anoying beep sound when backspace is entered in tty:

nvim /etc/mobprobe.d/nobeep.conf
    ----------------------
    blacklist pcspkr

### **Internet connection**
After logging in as root, let's start the dhcp service to and verify the internet connection:

For a wired connection with dynamic ip address :

    systemctl start dhcpcd
    ping www.archlinux.org

For a wireless connection, run:

    systemctl start iwd
    systemctl enable rfkill-unblock@all
    ping www.archlinux.org

If the connection works, don't forget to enable these systemd services by replacing the _start_ command to _enable_.

### **Video driver**
Before any further ado, let's install the video driver required by our hardware.

For a **Virtual Machine** (such as vmware), just run:

    pacman -S open-vm-tools
    systemctl enable vmtoolsd.service
    systemctl enable vmware-vmblock-fuse.service

For a **Nvidia** graphic card, just run:

    pacman -S nvidia nvidia-settings
    reboot

After the system has rebooted, just run:

    nvidia-xconfig

    # Verify your xorg configuration file:
    nvim /etc/X11/xorg.conf

**Note:** The documentation for the Nvidia Drivers installation can be found [here](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/NVIDIA).

### **User Management**
Now that the system is working and is connected to internet, it is time to add our user to the system.

To do so, just run:

    useradd -m -G wheel -s /bin/bash thib
    passwd thib

As we added the new created user to the wheel group, let's give this group the permitions to use sudo commands:

    EDITOR=nvim visudo
    ------------------------------------------------------------------
    # Uncomment to allow members of group wheel to execute any command
    %wheel ALL=(ALL) ALL

Now that our new user is created and can run sudo commands, we can logout from the root user and login with our new user. Just run:

    exit


### **Window manager**
 Now, it is time to install a window manager.

Before that, we need to install the X Window System (Xorg). To do so, just run:

    sudo pacman -S xorg xorg-xinit

Once the operation is successful, we can install the window manager of our choice. I will go for bspwm.

    sudo pacman -S bspwm sxhkd

These are the core packages for the i3 windoww manager, but I also usually install:

* A compositor
* A program launcher
* A terminal
* A wallpaper manager
* Git
* The user directories
* An AUR client
* etc...

This can be done by running:

    sudo pacman -S polybar picom dmenu alacritty feh git xdg-user-dirs
    xdg-user-dirs-update

I usually use yay as my AUR client:

    cd Downloads/
    git clone https://aur.archlinux.org/yay.git
    cd yay
    makepkg -si

Now that all of this stuff is done, we can configure Xinit to start our window manager. To do so, let's start by copying the default xinit configuration file:

    cp /etc/X11/xinit/xinitrc ~/.xinitrc

We also need to copy the default bspwm and sxhkd config files to our home directory by doing like so :
    
    mkdir ~/.config/bspwm
    mkdir ~/.config/sxhkd
    cp /usr/share/doc/bspwm/examples/bspwmrc ~/.config/bspwm/bspwmrc
    cp /usr/share/doc/bspwm/examples/sxhkdrc ~/.config/sxhkd/sxhkdrc

Now, let's replace the default configuration by ours:

    # Replace these lines:
    twm &
    xclock -geometry 50x50-1+1 &
    xterm -geometry 80x50+494+51 &
    xterm -geometry 80x20+494-0 &
    exec xterm -geometry 80x66+0+0 -name login

    # By those lines:
    setxkbmap -layout fr
    picom &
    exec bspwm

Now, you should be able to start the newly installed window manager by running:

    startx

And that's the end ! Now, you can continue to configure your system as you wishes.
